[Music]
my thanks to all of you and now it's on
to Chicago and let's win there
[Applause]
[Music]
on the 8th of June 1968 Americans pay
tribute to a remarkable politician the
younger brother of former President John
F Kennedy Senator Robert Kennedy had
been assassinated three days earlier in
the back room of a Los Angeles hotel
Sirhan Bishara Sirhan was arrested at
the scene of the crime in what the Los
Angeles Police Department
the LAPD thought was an open-and-shut
case
[Music]
we're trying to prove that there was a
travesty of justice in 1969 at Sir hands
trial we're trying to prove that there
was no way that he could have shocked
the senator let alone killed the senator
my main job right now is putting the
truth together
that's her hand did not shoot Robert
Kennedy the second gunman did
[Music]
if you look at him he came to America in
the late 50s as a child as a refugee
from Palestine he had quite a tough life
growing up and then suddenly he's in the
spotlight as the assassin of Robert
Kennedy without remembering anything
that happened that night
[Music]
Kennedy had authorized the selling of
bombers to Israel and that incensed him
because he was from Palestine and he
found the Palestinians were getting a
bad rap that's what his lawyers argued
in the trial that he was so upset at
that that he kind of snapped and went
into a self-induced trance and and
killed Kennedy in a you know moment of
rage
[Music]
I believe that Sirhan was a gentle
person he had never done a violent thing
in his life
[Music]
when he saw Kennedy speak in an earlier
event he said Kennedy looked like a
saint to him and it's like this was a
man whose politics really lined up with
Sir hands so it is a weird break for him
to suddenly turn I don't want to kill
the guy who really is more sympathetic
to his cause than any other politician
on the American scene Sirhan Sirhan had
no criminal record before Robert
Kennedy's assassination he wasn't
involved in any political activity and
the Palestinian cause had no real
traction in the u.s. at that time
despite the 1967 war I would think in
terms of a case like this properly
looking into it and properly looking at
a guy who's still in prison Lee Harvey
Oswald
obviously was killed two days after the
JFK assassination James Earl Ray the
alleged killer of Martin Luther King he
died in the late 90s so CERN is still
with us
why not investigate his case properly
and while there's still time and we can
do something about it
in 2017 US President Donald Trump
ordered the release of all documents
relating to the assassination of John F
Kennedy Robert Kennedy's older brother
in 1963 these files had remained
classified since 1964 Lee Harvey Oswald
was arrested in Dallas but was shot dead
two days later live on TV and so never
went to trial
[Music]
Sirhan Sirhan was arrested at the scene
of Robert Kennedy's shooting and
sentenced to death
in April 1969 commuted to life
imprisonment three years later
but since the 1970s commentators and
eyewitnesses have called for a new
investigation and in 2012 the Senators
son Robert Kennedy jr. wrote to the
Attorney General
asking for new evidence to be considered
in the case
al Jazeera has now examined the
different theories about the
assassination and the reasons behind
calls for a new investigation into the
conviction of sir Han nearly fifty years
ago
quite right that a lot of evidence was
destroyed a lot of evidence was
destroyed
scandalous horrendous in the case that I
think in any murder case to destroy
evidence the way they did that's
horrendous
you know I can't speak for the LAPD and
why you know they didn't do a better job
investigating the case why they
destroyed some evidence I don't know
all the evidence was destroyed after the
trial but they had a legal obligation to
save the evidence because Sirhan was
going to file an appeal or his attorneys
work so that evidence under the law
should have been preserved for the next
for the appeal
and according to the LA Police
Department they just didn't have his
face to store it several commentators
and witnesses have said that the LAPD
lost or hid evidence or that there was a
second gunman books have been written
and different conspiracy theories
examined documents have gone missing and
people have died taking their evidence
with them al Jazeera has gone back to
the events of the fifth of June 1968 and
heard from eyewitnesses and from
journalists who've looked into the case
for 10 years it's also examined audio
and visual evidence which may not have
been given enough credence at the time
it's not possible to return to the
actual scene of the crime the Ambassador
Hotel was demolished in 2006 and the
Robert F Kennedy community schools
opened on the site in 2010 the schools
and memorials now stand near where
Robert Kennedy was assassinated on the
evening of the 5th of June 1968
[Music]
he just won the primary election to be
the California Democratic Party's
nomination for a u.s. president there
was a last-minute decision to take a
back route out from the main hall
through a small kitchen where he was
shot
I saw Sirhan prior to Senator coming
down
when I first saw him I thought it was
another dishwasher
[Music]
that person didn't seem unusual to me he
didn't appear out of the ordinary
he was just started making small talk
with me asking me how long do you think
the speech is gonna last is it almost
over and I just said I don't know
my thanks to all of you and now it's on
to Chicago and let's win it
he finished his speech I could hear the
applause and then I saw him and his
entourage began walking toward me the
first time I saw saw him as we entered
the room where there was a trace stacker
here which was six to eight inches above
the ground Sirhan was not a very tall
person so he was standing on top of that
there were a bunch of trays but you
could still stand on it so he could see
above everybody and you could see as the
senator was progressing bob was moving
on at that point so I was about six feet
behind
the senator would have been to my left
and I would have been almost parallel to
him
walking toward the colonial room I was
mainly probably about two steps ahead of
senator Kennedy at that time I was
standing literally within three feet of
the senator karl was pulling senator
Kennedy I believe by his left hand which
made it awkward for the senator because
he was shaking with his right hand and
karl was grabbing his left pulling him
this way Vincent de Piero was very near
to Kennedy when he was shot but his
desta monie differs from the other
eyewitnesses so bob was shaking hands
and after after he came in I followed
him in he started shaking hands with
Hazel Perez and and and Juan Romero
Romero was a hotel worker in the crush
of people around Kennedy as he moved
through the kitchen I was able to shake
his hand then he took a step forward
took a step that step and a half
and I saw sir Han with the gun in his
hand coming up around Carl Uther and as
he came up he was his hand was
outstretched totally outstretched
eyewitnesses say that sir Han raised his
right hand holding an Iver Johnson cadet
22 caliber revolver pointed at Kennedy
they say sir Han fired two shots
when I heard the first pop or shot which
I believe was a shot
the first I thought was a firecracker I
turned toward my left at that point I
saw sirhan sirhan immediately to my left
no one between he and myself holding a
gun shooting into the crowd the crowd of
people shooting into the direction where
I had last seen senator Kennedy Carl
euchre he's a terrific witness he was
their closest of anybody he said so her
hand came the gun was close to his face
her Sirhan got two shots off and he
grabbed him and put the hand down on
steam table and Sirhan continued to fire
the gun first it was bang bang and then
and then III looked back over there and
there were there were a commotion going
on
[Music]
and then I heard the others a recession
and that's when witnesses told the
police we heard two shots a pause and
then a flurry of shots and that's pretty
much what I heard too an Iver Johnson
cadet 22 can hold up to eight bullets so
after firing the first two shots sir Han
had six left
[Music]
and he kept robot like pulling the
trigger until he fired the other six
shots but he had no control over and the
bullets went all over the place
after shooting he was surrounded by
about 20 people that were trying to kill
him
that's why I mean he was in custody by
all these guys until the police arrived
the suspect is in our custody now we do
not know who he is he had no
identification he refuses to make a
statement of any kind he does speak and
understand English the gun is in our
custody it's a 22 caliber eight shot and
all eight shots
according to the LAPD report one bullet
went through Kennedy's coat without
penetrating his body it scratched Paul
shrade's head as he stood right behind
Kennedy the police found that bullet at
the crime scene I got shot not knowing I
had been shot I thought that I was being
electrocuted the way I was shaking when
I went down and so I didn't see Bob got
shot got shot actually he didn't at that
point another bullet hit Robert Kennedy
behind his right ear and that was the
fatal shot one more hit him under his
right armpit and exited through the top
of his shoulder that bullet allegedly
hit the ceiling but the police never
found it
a fourth bullet also hits Kennedy under
his right armpit and settled in his
spine under his neck so that was four
bullets
Sirhan had four more remaining
a fifth bullet hit ira goldstein in his
left thigh and lodged there and a sixth
bullet hit her winstrol in his left leg
a seventh bullet hit william Wisel in
the stomach and remained there
according to the police reports the
eighth and final bullet was fired at the
ceiling bouncing back and hitting
Elizabeth Evans in the head the police
found this part as well
first two bullets shooting of missing
Kennedy shooting me the one two and
going westward to Goldstein two shots
one through his pant leg and once into
its butt one and strolls leg and one
into Evans forehead that's seven bullets
out of a shot revolver
how could he have shot Robert Kennedy
four times on top of shrade's point
evidence offered by two FBI
investigators William Bailey and Dewayne
Wolfer needs taking into account Bailey
and Wolfer attended the crime scene as
soon as the assassination took place
they discovered two more bullets that
were not mentioned in the LAPD report
the next day William Bailey an FBI agent
at the scene is in front is on the front
page of all the newspapers pointing a
doorframe and in 1976 he gave it a sworn
statement that he saw two bullet holes
in that doorframe if a second gun is not
firing there cannot be any bullet holes
in the wooden door frames so the police
take those door frames down and they
bring them to police station to do work
on them - turns out they're too many
these bullets represent too many bullets
her hands gun holds eight bullets more
recent forensic analysis also supports
the view that more bullets were fired at
the scene than Sirhan could have had in
his gun but the LAPD does not appear to
have taken that on board then in 2005
further evidence
Canada's victory speech in the main hall
of the hotel was recorded by a Polish
journalist
Stanislav presents key when Kennedy's
group took the back route out presence
key followed them but inadvertently
carried on recording this distorted
audio was recorded just outside the
kitchen
it's a very poor quality recording which
meant for many years people didn't
really analyze it properly so it was
only when Phil Van Praagh came along and
started analyzing in 2005 that you know
he made a number of very interesting
discoveries and the most important of
which were the 13 shot sounds on the
recording and there were two instances
of double shots which means two shots
fired so close together they couldn't
have come from the same gun
the only way you can explain is that
there was a second gunman in a position
behind Kennedy word that the prosecution
never proves that Sirhan was behind
Kennedy or was able to shoot him
point-blank Thomas Noguchi was the chief
medical examiner and coroner for Los
Angeles County and performed the autopsy
on Robert Kennedy he submitted a
detailed report on the bullets that hit
Kennedy this is that report and the
evidence he gave in court gunshot wound
number one direction right to left
slightly back to front upward gunshot
wound number two entry right axillary
region direction right to left back to
front upward gunshot wound number three
direction right to left back to front
the autopsy report is probably the most
decisive evidence that Sirhan physically
could not have shot the senator they've
got three shots into the senator one
shot went through his shoulder pad all
came from behind the senator at point
range all shot from the right side an
upward angle between 30 and 35 degrees
which meant that the shooter was
actually kneeling down behind Robert
Kennedy when he was firing his gun
however none of the eyewitnesses said
that Sirhan was low down furthermore
Thomas Noguchi report said that the
muzzle of the gun that fired the shot
that killed Kennedy was a maximum of
three inches or seven centimeters away
from him
at powder burn range no so your viewers
understand what powder burn ranges
it means the gun was pressed strongly up
against either the the body or in case
of the fatal shot just about an inch
behind the ear Karl Uecker he said he
saw sore hand coming out and came very
close to him and that gun sir had a gun
it was two feet from Kennedy not sir
hand being two feet but sir hands gun
being two feet and that was confirmed by
Edmond AZ and another assistant Maitre
D' who was right behind them at that
point
so there were different eyewitness
accounts of where sir Han was when he
shot Kennedy his distance from the
senator the number of bullets fired and
the coroner's report well either Noguchi
is wrong or the eyewitnesses that said
he was 2 feet away era and yet more
evidence emerged to cast doubt on the
safety officer hands conviction and then
bullets were swapped and then evidence
was destroyed I you can't make up
something like this
[Music]
Senator Robert Kennedy was fatally shot
on the 5th of June 1968 after winning
the California nomination to be the
Democratic candidate for president at
Jordanian Palestinian Sirhan Sirhan was
tried and jailed for his murder
but since the 1970s there have been
calls for a new investigation based on
differing eyewitness accounts the number
of shots fired and distance of Sirhan
from Kennedy when he fired there seemed
to be particularly discrepancies between
eyewitness Vincente Piero's testimony
and the report of Los Angeles County
Medical Examiner and coroner Thomas
Noguchi the gun itself was maybe three
or four inches from the head but Sirhan
was about three approximately three feet
away I mean I didn't measure that it was
an estimate but the court record of
Vincent de pierres testimony says I saw
those two go off and after the second
one I couldn't see because I had blood
all over my face the police had a lot of
witnesses that said Sirhan was standing
four or five six feet in front of Bobby
Kennedy and that didn't quite match up
with what Noguchi found well either
Noguchi is wrong or the eyewitnesses
that said he was two feet away or wrong
movie cameras captured scenes in the
kitchen immediately after the
assassination but arguably the most
significant pictures were taken by an
amateur photographer and Kennedy
follower
there was a teenager Scott and York in
the pantry that night he had a 36
millimeter camera a roll of film in
there for 36 exposures he was taking
pictures
and yard took pictures before during and
after the assassination the Los Angeles
Police the LAPD
took his camera and filmed to their labs
they later returned pictures to any art
but only those taken before and after
the assassination those NR took during
the assassination were never returned
what happened to those photos why did
the defense Steve asked they knew never
asked for the number of bullets found
the angles they'd been shot from and
yards disappearing photos all combined
to cast reasonable doubt as to whether
Sirhan was the only gunman in their
investigation the LAPD also reported
that the type of bullets fired was
compatible with Sir Hans gun
and then they say we can prove this
because the bullet in Kennedy's shoulder
matched the saran gun and they were
wrong about that but they were they were
lying about that as well
they say the bullet that went into his
head which is a fragment tiny fragment
nearly the whole bullet
they say that matched the saran gun - we
saw striations on that fragment which is
crazy because there are no striations on
that fragment they can't prove it but
that's what they did before they before
the jury they even lied about that ball
shread Lisa Pease and Laurie du sac all
cast doubt on the police findings
because they couldn't match the bullets
to Sir hands gun the bullets were
switched so that a match could be made
and the problem was they couldn't use
sir hands gun to make matching bullets
because sir hands gun had been given to
the grand jury and then bullets were
swapped and then evidence was destroyed
I can't make up something like this
medical examiner Thomas Noguchi was
never asked to identify the bullets he
always maintained that the fatal shot
was fired at close range
while most eyewitnesses said sir Han was
further away there is a suspicion that
it was it was
instituted and that he would have
revealed them
at first there was a movement to try to
discredit Noguchi and that he say that
he had done an incompetent autopsy well
that didn't work because Noguchi refused
to step down and and and said he would
fight them in court once they realize
they were gonna have a fight with the
coroner they switched positions and now
said oh well Tom Noguchi said that the
bullets were fired from an inch way so
it must be all the witnesses that were
wrong so they switched horses in the
middle of the race you know they got rid
of him he was not going to play ball
their way because he's an honest man and
he called things the way he saw them and
he was very very upset with the whole my
view the way the proceedings went the
question remained as to the number of
bullets fired at the scene but also as
to why the LAPD didn't question anyone
other than Sirhan as potential suspects
the police didn't follow any of the
leads that that would point to a second
gun no one has seen the second shoot we
have no eyewitnesses for that how is
that possible
right there closed space everybody there
all these eyewitnesses that are so
reliable when it comes to describing
what Syrian did suddenly fail to be
reliable for the second shooter who's
right there two inches away from him
everyone missed that
Thayne Eugen Caesar was on the door he
was on different doors but right before
the shooting he was on the the door
leading into the kitchen pantry area
he followed Kennedy in which he was not
supposed to do it was against orders
from from the person who was supervising
the guards for the hunt for the hotel he
was supposed to stay away one is the
security guard who was standing behind
senator Kennedy to his right which is
where the shots came from and he did
have his gun drawn that night and he
also did own a 22 caliber pistol with
the same rifling characteristics as her
hands gun
many researchers believe that feign
Caesar shot Kennedy he was certainly in
the right position he was close enough I
don't think that he he shot the senator
but I think he might have seen something
he has been the traditional suspect I'm
not convinced that he was the gunman but
certainly is worth scrutiny two other
figures were seen in or near the kitchen
one Michael Wayne was initially detained
but then released he was later seen
leaving the hotel with a girl wearing a
polkadot dress the other suspect is a
taller a dark-skinned man who resembles
her hand in some respects but was taller
than he was who was seen in the pantry
and then seen in the pantry with the gun
and earlier he's been in the pantry and
Sirhan and this man were looking at each
other that man was seen with a gun and
there's at least one witness that said
he saw that man shooting at Kennedy from
behind and that man was seen running
from the pantry with the gun and then
was seen running away with the girl in
the polkadot dress down the stairs and
out through the parking lot
but was the girl in the polkadot dress
Kennedy campaign worker valerie salt or
Elaine Neil whose husband claimed to
have worked for the CIA
you have Sandy Serrano who saw the
polkadot dress girl and this guy coming
down the stairways and the girl in the
polkadot dress is saying we shot him we
shot him at Serrano looks and she goes
who did you shoot and she said we shot
senator Kennedy and runs off into the
darkness of the back side of the hotel
[Music]
these people knew Kenny had been shot
before anyone around them had known
Kenny had been shot okay the polka dot
address the woman in the polka dot
address and any other anomaly you want
to find in any particular event of epic
proportions like this somebody famous a
big political event like an
assassination there are going to be lots
of little anomalies that become pregnant
with meaning because we're looking for
something meaningful and you can always
find something that sticks out that no
one knows has any who was that person
the woman in the polkadot dress who
knows who knows probably nothing
this woman spent the day with a local
chemical salesman who was at the
Ambassador to sell them chemicals for
the hotel she was afraid and she was
looking for help for somebody to help
her get a passport to get out of the
country the next day she predicted the
killing with accuracy she said they're
going to take care of mr. Kennedy
tonight at the winning reception that's
a prediction hours before the event
occurred
[Music]
at his parole hearing in March 2011
Sirhan Sirhan's account of events was
generally quite clear until the actual
moment of the shooting
I wanted to create to get some coffee
because I just wanted to make sure that
when I drove home that I would there's
no chance that I could so remember that
part of it yes I remember wanting to get
some coffee
you're hired and shooting yes so what do
you remember that I remember being being
tackled by the people there and they
almost choked me to death
demand will not end there I wish they
had because this this thing would have
been ID'd early I didn't see Bobby
Kennedy down I didn't know what would
transpire because they had me on the
table and I think that I came to or we
can't began to to feel the truth to
sense what was going on so what would
you say that whenever they were choking
yeah you know and they would say don't
kill him but or something like that
so you heard that I remember some some
words like that okay and what did you
think it happened I didn't I didn't I
didn't know what legitimate Lee did not
remember those critical moments in 2011
Sirhan Sirhan's defense team consulted
hypnosis expert dr. Daniel P Brown to
test the theory that he may have been
hypnotized to carry out the Kennedy
assassination
we had dr. Brown from Harvard and over
70 hours with Sirhan he is one of the
world's leading experts on mind control
and conditioning and Dan Brown after all
this time with Sirhan is of the mind
that he was clearly programmed
[Music]
about ten five ten percent of the
population is just naturally highly
hypnotic they can enter trance states
block out feelings and so he clearly was
one of these people
[Music]
Sirhan Sirhan's defense team used the
hypnosis theory as the basis of his
final federal appeal in 2013 but the
court rejected the appeal with the judge
calling this psychological test results
quote of negligible weight he said they
were intriguing but fell short of quote
demonstrating that Sirhan was subjected
to mind-control
one other detail of the assassination
should not be overlooked the last-minute
decision to change the route taken by
Kennedy out of the main hall he was
asked to go to the press room through
the back kitchen but who knew about the
change of plan did sir hon
I don't know how how how anybody knew
that because like you said nobody knew
what was the planner was changed at the
last minute
it's important to try to understand all
the facts related to why you win it
depends you know is it was it just a
coincidence that he would I think not
only because coincidences that lead to
assassinations of this sort are my view
very suspect who made that decision and
why what explains Sir Hans presents
there was there enough security was
Sirhan working with another individual
there were a lot of election parties
that night and he went to one of them
had a different location and then you
know once that party was finished you
know somebody there told them hey
there's a big party down at the
Ambassador do you want to do you want to
check it out so he went down there to
check it out and then he went back to
his car and apparently he got his gun
and he went back in search of coffee to
the hotel how is there and able to get
into the pantry with a gun that's an
excellent question because there were
two Ace guards one at each end who were
supposed to be making sure that only
people who were credentialed with
Kennedy credentials were allowed into
the kitchen so how did Sirhan get past
them well you know the obvious answer is
maybe he had helpers maybe there was
somebody who took him in said he's with
me maybe it was somebody with a pt-109
pin Sirhan Sirhan's defense attorney was
the los angeles criminal lawyer Grant B
Cooper the basis of the defense case
that Cooper argued was that Sirhan had
committed the crime because he was
mentally ill and that he had acted alone
Cooper was criticized at the time for
the way he dealt with Sir Hans personal
writings being used by the prosecution
in court the notebooks should not have
been allowed into evidence at the trial
because it was taken from the house
without a search warrant and the defense
team never raised that issue they should
have hired a private handwriting expert
to look into that
there have been many obstacles in the
way mainly his own defense counsel
frankly early upon early on
grant Cooper agreed to all the
prosecutors books this is a scandal how
this could be allowed to proceed it in a
court of law is a scandal but it did was
his lawyer told the told the the jury
right at the outset we're not going to
try to prove his innocence we believe
he's guilty this is defense counsel we
believe we just want we're here to try
to save his life
Sirhan Sirhan's defense faced other
problems there have been suggestions
that pressure was put on some eye
witnesses to change their stories as in
the case of sandra serrano this audio
recording was released long after the
trial along with other documents as late
as 1988
[Music]
she just reported the police what she
saw and yet they treated her like a
criminal
after weeks of bullying her finally she
gave up and said I don't know what I saw
I testified under oath and on lie
detector test and I saw the polkadot
dress and he said no you never saw this
girl and he kept drilling into my head
that I was wrong that I didn't see
anyone that I didn't see anyone I was
off the the lie detector he turned it
off and he was saying look you didn't
see the girl in the polkadot dress why
he wanted me to do greeted that I do not
know but I did see the girl with the
polkadot dress which was Valerie Schulte
which I did identify in court they were
battering to change the story in in a in
in face tape of Hank Hernandez doing
this interrogation he himself says you
puttin words in my mouth part of the
problem with police investigations is
they too are subject to cognitive biases
they think we know who did it and we're
only going to pursue this particular
case we don't care about all this other
stuff they narrow their focus down to
like one person they think that did it
and then you know so this goes in
support of your case that well maybe
they're ignoring you know somebody else
that might have been relevant to the
case yes that does happen
you don't need to have everybody
involved in it all you need is the one
man that is controlling the
investigation because she decides who's
gonna be interviewed what's gonna be
buried what is gonna be fabricated and
they did it
I sympathize with Santos Eric sir had
that he took the rap unfairly unjustly
and dishonestly on the bit on the part
of the prosecution and that story has to
be told we have a very strong case based
upon not Theory not conspiracies but
based upon the prosecution's own hard
evidence which they tried to destroy a
lot of it but they some of it they
didn't destroy and that's gonna be
useful
he should have been eligible for parole
in 1980 and he should be released he
meets all the qualifications under the
California parole and we have a
Palestinian assassin with all all that
means to American voters and to the
politicians who would way you know would
weigh their decision-making in terms of
whether they really want to alienate the
Jewish voters in America or whatever by
their support be seen to support
Palestinian assassin I actually don't
believe Sirhan understood the role he
was playing I truly believe from years
twenty-five years of research the Sirhan
had been hypnotized by others who wanted
to use him as a pawn in their plot
it's just a question of not giving up
once you get involved and you see
injustice prevailing you still stay on
until you try to do as much as you can
at some point you may have to say that's
it I can do no more and James Earl Ray
died in prison Sirhan Sirhan is in
prison and if we're not successful then
he will also die in prison Sirhan Sirhan
was convicted on the 17th of April 1969
his death sentence was commuted to life
imprisonment three years later
defense lawyers have been trying to get
him a new trial since 1994 but have so
far failed sir Han has a parole hearing
every five years
this was his fourteenth in March 2011
and parole was denied again in 2016 the
public outpouring of grief at Robert
Kennedy's death was a sign that they had
lost a principled politician a senator
from New York who cared about poverty in
the south and racial segregation
everywhere even if the case is reopened
the exact truth of what happened over
fifty years ago may now never be known
[Music]
you